.. code:: ipython3

    import stistools
    from astropy.io import fits

Defringing STIS CCD Spectra With The Stistools Defringing Tool Suite
====================================================================

STIS CCD spectra taken at wavelengths >7000\ :math:`\mathring A` (the
G750M and G750L modes) are impacted by “fringing”, a phenomenon caused
by interference of multiple reflections between the two surfaces of the
CCD in cases where the wavelength of the incident light is a small
integer multiple of the distance between the two surfaces of the CCD
(Goudfrooij et al. 1998). ``stistools`` contains four tools used for
correcting the fringing effect, ``normspflat``, ``prepspec``,
``mkfringeflat``, and ``defringe``, which are located in the
``stistools.defringe`` package. These tools are python ports of the
original IRAF/PyRAF ``stis`` defringing tools. The following serves as a
guide for using these tools to defringe STIS CCD data, and presents
several practical examples for common use cases.

This guide assumes that the ``stistools`` package has been installed.
For instructions on how to install ``stistools``, consult the Getting
Started Guide:
https://stistools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/gettingstarted.html.
Additionally, it assumes you’ve setup CRDS which is also walked through
in the Getting Started Guide.

Data Setup
----------

To defringe a STIS CCD G750M/G750L observation, the fits files for the
fringed science image in addition to the associated contemporaneous
fringe flat for the observation are required. It’s standard practice to
take contemporaneous fringe flats for G750M/G750L spectra, the filename
for the fringe flat is stored in the primary header of the science
image, specifically in the ``'FRNGFLAT'`` keyword. Additionally, the
``'OPT_ELEM'`` keyword in the primary header contains the mode used for
the observation, which will be important as there are a few differences
in the defringing process depending on the mode. These differences will
be highlighted in each step.

.. code:: ipython3

    #setup data paths
    sci_file = "odvkl3050" # the science file
    flat_file = "odvkl3080" # the associated fringe flat
    
    #Confirm that the flat file is indeed the associated fringe flat for odvkl3050
    print("Associated Fringe Flat: "+fits.getheader(f"{sci_file}_raw.fits",0)['FRNGFLAT'])
    print("Observing Mode: "+fits.getheader(f"{sci_file}_raw.fits",0)['OPT_ELEM'])


.. parsed-literal::

    Associated Fringe Flat: ODVKL3080
    Observing Mode: G750L


1. Normalize the Fringe Flat
----------------------------

The ``normspflat`` tool is used to normalize the contemporaneous flat
field image. The ``do_cal`` parameter tells ``normspflat`` whether to
calibrate the flat file using ``calstis`` or not. If using a raw input
image, ``do_cal`` should be set to true, if using a calibrated image
(``crj`` or ``sx2``) ``do_cal`` can be set to false. The output file,
which has the ``nsp`` identifier in our example, is the normalized flat
field for use in the next steps. It’s worth noting that in the
``do_cal=True`` case, ``normspflat`` will print out a message
identifying the most calibrated output file produced by calstis, which
in this case is a ``crj`` file.

.. code:: ipython3

    stistools.defringe.normspflat(f"{flat_file}_raw.fits", 
                                  f"{flat_file}_nsp.fits", do_cal=True, 
                                  wavecal=f"{sci_file}_wav.fits")


.. parsed-literal::

    File written:  /Users/stisuser/data/path/odvkl3080_crj.fits


**G750M/G750L Point of Difference:** Fringe flat images taken with G750L
include not only the IR fringing at wavelengths greater than 7500
Angstroms, but also some fringes at wavelengths less than 6000 Angstroms
due to an order-sorter filter. Since these order-sorter fringes are
already included in the sensitivity function, they should not be
included in the fringe flat, and so these columns should be set to unity
in the normalized fringe flat. The following code accomplishes this:

.. code:: ipython3

    # Flatten the blue end of the flat-field image [ONLY FOR G750L]
    
    with fits.open(f"{flat_file}_nsp.fits") as hdulist:
        hdulist[1].data[:250,:] = 1
        hdulist.writeto(f"{flat_file}_nsp.fits",overwrite=True)

2. Prepare the Science File for the Defringing Correction (Optional)
--------------------------------------------------------------------

The ``prepspec`` tool is used to calibrate the raw science image. It
essentially runs the science through calstis with a specific set of
calibration flags. ``prepspec`` will not overwrite image products, so be
sure to remove any higher level science products (``flt``, ``crj``,
``sx1``, ``sx2``) from the working directory before you run it.

**Note:** Running ``prepspec`` is an optional step, if you already have
calibrated science data (``crj``/``sx2``) then running ``prepspec`` is
not essential. The main purpose of ``prepspec`` is to run calstis with a
specific set of calibration flags turned on (e.g. the keywords in the
header that control which calibration steps are performed and omitted by
calstis during calibration). In the typical case, the default calstis
flags will be sufficient for defringing. However, you may wish to delete
these data products and rebuild from the raw science file with
``prepspec`` to ensure that the correct calibration was done on the
files if you are uncertain.

.. code:: ipython3

    %%capture 
    #capture the long calstis output
    
    stistools.defringe.prepspec(f"{sci_file}_raw.fits")

3. Match Fringes in the Fringe Flat Field and the Science Spectra
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The ``mkfringeflat`` tool is used to calculate the appropriate shifts
and scale factors needed to match the fringes in the fringe flat and the
science spectra. The output is a shifted and scaled fringe flat which
can be named however you wish, but we refer to as an ``frr`` file
product in our documentation. The best shift and scale factors are
obtained by finding the values that minimize the RMS within a
user-specified search range. The parameters that control the range and
step size for the shift and scale have default values (shown explicitly
below) that should serve most use cases well. ``mkfringeflat`` will warn
the user if the best shift and scale values were found at the edge of
the range, suggesting the range may need to be expanded further to find
the best values. The ``beg_shift`` and ``end_shift`` arguments can be
used to adjust the shift range, while the ``beg_scale`` and
``end_scale`` arguments can be used to adjust the scale range.

**G750M/G750L Point of Difference:** The appropriate file type to use as
the input science file depends on the observation mode. For G750L,
``crj`` files should be used. For G750M, geometric correction is
required before defringing can take place, so ``sx2`` products should be
used.

.. code:: ipython3

    # choose the correct science product type based on the mode
    mode = fits.getheader(f"{sci_file}_raw.fits",0)['OPT_ELEM']
    if mode == "G750L":
        prod_type = "crj"
    elif mode == "G750M":
        prod_type = "sx2"
    
    stistools.defringe.mkfringeflat(f"{sci_file}_{prod_type}.fits", f"{flat_file}_nsp.fits", 
                                    f"{flat_file}_frr.fits", beg_shift=-0.5, end_shift=2, shift_step=0.1,
                                    beg_scale=0.8, end_scale=1.7, scale_step=0.04)


.. parsed-literal::

    mkfringeflat.py version 0.1
     - matching fringes in a flatfield to those in science data
     Extraction center: row 583
       Extraction size: 11.0 pixels  [Aperture: 52X2]
    Range to be normalized: [578:589,4:1020]
    
    Determining best shift for fringe flat
    
    shift =     -0.500, rms =   8.8683
    shift =     -0.400, rms =   9.5374
    shift =     -0.300, rms =  10.3134
    shift =     -0.200, rms =  10.8593
    shift =     -0.100, rms =  12.8151
    shift =      0.000, rms =   2.8657
    shift =      0.100, rms =   2.9300
    shift =      0.200, rms =   2.9326
    shift =      0.300, rms =   3.0001
    shift =      0.400, rms =   3.0489
    shift =      0.500, rms =   3.0998
    shift =      0.600, rms =   3.1530
    shift =      0.700, rms =   3.2087
    shift =      0.800, rms =   3.2670
    shift =      0.900, rms =   3.3279
    shift =      1.000, rms =   3.3917
    shift =      1.100, rms =   3.9375
    shift =      1.200, rms =   8.4936
    shift =      1.300, rms =   2.5887
    shift =      1.400, rms =   2.7323
    shift =      1.500, rms =   2.9274
    shift =      1.600, rms =   3.2250
    shift =      1.700, rms =   3.7717
    shift =      1.800, rms =   5.1464
    shift =      1.900, rms =  12.0936
    shift =      2.000, rms =   3.4937
     
     Best shift :      1.347 pixels
     Shifted flat : odvkl3080_nsp_sh.fits
                    (Can be used as input flat for next iteration)
    
    Determining best scaling of amplitude of fringes in flat
    
    Fringes scaled       0.800: RMS =   2.7298
    Fringes scaled       0.840: RMS =   2.7122
    Fringes scaled       0.880: RMS =   2.6956
    Fringes scaled       0.920: RMS =   2.6800
    Fringes scaled       0.960: RMS =   2.6653
    Fringes scaled       1.000: RMS =   2.6515
    Fringes scaled       1.040: RMS =   2.6384
    Fringes scaled       1.080: RMS =   2.6260
    Fringes scaled       1.120: RMS =   2.6142
    Fringes scaled       1.160: RMS =   2.6031
    Fringes scaled       1.200: RMS =   2.5925
    Fringes scaled       1.240: RMS =   2.5825
    Fringes scaled       1.280: RMS =   2.5730
    Fringes scaled       1.320: RMS =   2.5639
    Fringes scaled       1.360: RMS =  12.0382
    Fringes scaled       1.400: RMS =  10.9230
    Fringes scaled       1.440: RMS =   5.0855
    Fringes scaled       1.480: RMS =   4.9331
    Fringes scaled       1.520: RMS =   4.7929
    Fringes scaled       1.560: RMS =   4.6632
    Fringes scaled       1.600: RMS =   4.5430
    Fringes scaled       1.640: RMS =   4.4316
    Fringes scaled       1.680: RMS =   4.3276
     
     Best scale :      1.284
    Output flat : odvkl3080_frr.fits
      (to be used as input to task 'defringe.py')


4. Defringe the Science Spectra
-------------------------------

The final step is to use the ``defringe`` tool to divide the scaled and
shifted fringe flat off of the calibrated science spectra, removing the
fringing pattern.

**G750M/G750L Point of Difference:** As in the previous step, the input
science product type is dependent on mode. (G750L: ``crj``, G750M:
``sx2``)

.. code:: ipython3

    stistools.defringe.defringe(f"{sci_file}_{prod_type}.fits", f"{flat_file}_frr.fits", overwrite=True)


.. parsed-literal::

    Fringe flat data were read from the primary HDU
    108 pixels in the fringe flat were less than or equal to 0
    Imset 1 done
    Defringed science saved to odvkl3050_drj.fits




.. parsed-literal::

    'odvkl3050_drj.fits'



We now have a ``drj`` file that is the fully defringed calibrated
science spectra. This file functionally behaves as the ``crj`` file used
to produce it, and may be worked with in the same manner.

**G750M/G750L Point of Difference**: If working with a G750M
observation, the output product by default will have the ``s2d``
identifier.

Extraction of 1D Spectra from Defringed Science Products
--------------------------------------------------------

As mentioned above, the defringed science products may be worked with as
normal calstis products. Typically, the next step would be extract 1D
spectra from these files. This can be accomplished by continuing the
calibration through ``calstis.calstis`` or performing the extraction
step individually using ``x1d.x1d``, please refer to the documentation
for those tools if you’re looking for guidance on that step.

1D Extraction of G750M Spectra
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It’s important to note that, at this time, ``x1d`` and ``calstis`` are
not able to extract 1D spectra from the G750M ``sx2`` products. ``sx2``
products have been geometrically rectified, which generates correlated
errors between wavelength bins. These errors are not well-handled by the
standard pipeline extraction algorithms.
